# 1.1 The Elements of Programming

## Exercise 1.1
>Below is a sequence of statements. What is the result printed by the interpreter in response to each statement? Assume that the sequence is to be evaluated in the order in which it is presented.
### Solution
```js
10;
> 10

5 + 3 + 4;
> 12

9 - 1;
> 8
 
6 / 2;
> 3

2 * 4 + (4 - 6);
> 6
 
const a = 3;
> undefined

const b = a + 1;
> undefined

a + b + a * b;
> 19

a === b;
> false

// (b > a && b < (a * b)) ? b : a
b > a && b < a * b ? b : a;
> 4 

a === 4
? 6
: b === 4
? 6 + 7 + a
: 25;
> 16

2 + (b > a ? b : a);
> 6 

(a > b
? a
: a < b
? b
: -1)
*
(a + 1);
> 16
```

## Exercise 1.2
> Translate the following expression into JavaScript
>
> ${\frac{5+4+(2-(3-(6+\frac45)))}{3(6-2)(2-7)}}$
### Solution
```js
(5 + 4 + (2 - (3 - (6 + 4 / 5))))
/
(3 * (6 - 2) * (2 - 7));

// -0.24666666666666667
```

## Exercise 1.3
> Declare a function that takes three numbers as arguments and returns the sum of the squares of the two larger numbers.
### Solution
```js
function square(x) {
    return x * x;
}

function sum_of_squares(x, y) {
    return square(x) + square(y);
}

function f(x, y, z) {
    // find out which number is the smallest one
    if (x <= y && x <= z) {
        return sum_of_squares(y, z);
    } else if (y <= x && y <= z) {
        return sum_of_squares(x, z);
    } else {
        return sum_of_squares(x, y);
    }
}

// 8
console.log(f(2, 2, 2));
// 320
console.log(f(2, 8, 16));
// 320
console.log(f(8, 2, 16));
// 320
console.log(f(16, 8, 2));

```

## Exercise 1.4
> Observe that our model of evaluation allows for applications whose function expressions are compound expressions. Use this observation to describe the behavior of a_plus_abs_b:
> ```js
> function plus(a, b) { return a + b; }
>
> function minus(a, b) { return a - b; }
>
> function a_plus_abs_b(a, b) {
>     return (b >= 0 ? plus : minus)(a, b);
> }
> ```
>
### Solution
if `b` is greater than or equal to 0, return `plus(a, b)`; otherwise return `minus(a, b)`. This function compute `a + Math.abs(b)`.

## Exercise 1.5
> Ben Bitdiddle has invented a test to determine whether the interpreter he is faced with is using applicative-order evaluation or normal-order evaluation. He declares the following two functions:
> ```js
> function p() { return p(); }
>
> function test(x, y) {
>     return x === 0 ? 0 : y;
> }
> ```
> Then he evaluates the statement
> ```js
> test(0, p());
> ```
> What behavior will Ben observe with an interpreter that uses applicative-order evaluation? What behavior will he observe with an interpreter that uses normal-order evaluation? Explain your answer. (Assume that the evaluation rule for conditional expressions is same whether the interpreter is using normal or applicative order: The predicate expression is evaluated first, and the result determines whether to evaluate the consequent or the alternative expression.)
### Solution
Ben's test relies on the different evaluation strategies used by applicative-order and normal-order evaluators.

With an applicative-order evaluator, the arguments to a function are evaluated before the function is applied. So in the expression `test(0, p())`, the interpreter will first evaluate `0` and `p()` before applying `test`. 

The call to `p()` will not terminate, since `p` recursively calls itself forever. So the applicative-order evaluator will get stuck in an infinite loop trying to evaluate `p()` and will never return a result for the overall `test(0, p())` expression.

With a normal-order evaluator, the function is applied before its arguments are evaluated. So the interpreter will first apply `test` to the unevaluated `0` and `p()` arguments. Inside `test`, since `x === 0`, the conditional will evaluate to `0` without ever evaluating `y`. 

So with normal-order evaluation, `test(0, p())` will simply return `0` without getting stuck in an infinite loop.

In summary, with applicative-order evaluation Ben will observe the call get stuck in an infinite loop, while with normal-order evaluation he will observe it immediately return 0. The different behaviors let him determine the evaluation strategy used by the interpreter.

## Exercise 1.6
> Alyssa P. Hacker doesn’t like the syntax of conditional expressions, involving the characters ? and :. “Why can’t I just declare an ordinary conditional function whose application works just like conditional expressions?” she asks. Alyssa’s friend Eva Lu Ator claims this can indeed be done, and she declares a conditional function as follows:
> ```js
> function conditional(predicate, then_clause, else_clause) {
>     return predicate ? then_clause : else_clause;
> }
> ```
> Eva demonstrates the program for Alyssa:
> 
> ```js
> conditional(2 === 3, 0, 5);
> 5
> 
> conditional(1 === 1, 0, 5);
> 0
> ```
> Delighted, Alyssa uses conditional to rewrite the square-root program:
> ```js
> function sqrt_iter(guess, x) {
>     return conditional(is_good_enough(guess, x),
>                        guess,
>                        sqrt_iter(improve(guess, x),
>                                  x));
> }
> ```
> What happens when Alyssa attempts to use this to compute square roots? Explain.
### Solution
Alyssa's rewrite using the conditional function will lead to an infinite recursion.

The reason is that the conditional function evaluates all 3 arguments `(predicate, then_clause, and else_clause)` before invoking the conditional expression.

So in the recursive case, it will evaluate:
* `is_good_enough(guess, x)`
* `guess`
* `sqrt_iter(improve(guess, x), x)`

Evaluating the third argument `sqrt_iter(...)` will in turn trigger another evaluation of `is_good_enough, guess, and sqrt_iter(...)`, leading to infinite recursion.
## Exercise 1.7
> The `is_good_enough` test used in computing square roots will not be very effective for finding the square roots of very small numbers. Also, in real computers, arithmetic operations are almost always performed with limited precision. This makes our test inadequate for very large numbers. Explain these statements, with examples showing how the test fails for small and large numbers. An alternative strategy for implementing is_good_enough is to watch how guess changes from one iteration to the next and to stop when the change is a very small fraction of the guess. Design a square-root function that uses this kind of end test. Does this work better for small and large numbers?
### Solution
*Small numbers:*

For a very small number `x`, `abs(square(guess) - x) < 0.001` will be true even if guess is not very close to the actual square root. The reason is `0.001` might be a very large fraction of `x`. For example:
```js
sqrt(0.1)
> 0.316245562280389

sqrt(0.01)
> 0.10032578510960605

sqrt(0.001)
> 0.04124542607499115

sqrt(0.0001)
> 0.03230844833048122

sqrt(0.00001)
> 0.03135649010771716

sqrt(0.000001)
> 0.031260655525445276
```
So `is_good_enough` will stop iterating too early even though guess is far from the true square root.

*Large numbers:*

For a very large number `x`, `abs(square(guess) - x) < 0.001` will be `false` even if `sqrt_iter` iterates a long long time. The reason is `0.001` might be a very small fraction of `x`. For example:
```js
sqrt(10000000000)
> 100000

sqrt(100000000000)
> 316227.7660168379

sqrt(1000000000000)
> 1000000

sqrt(1000000000000)
> RangeError: Maximum call stack size exceeded
```
So `is_good_enough` will never stop iterating until maximum call stack size exceeded.

*Improved strategy*:

Instead of checking against a fixed threshold, we can stop when the absolute value of the difference between the previous guess and the new guess is less than a fraction of the new guess:
```js
function abs(x) {
    return x >= 0 ? x : -x;
}

function square(x) {
    return x * x;
}

function sqrt_iter(guess, x) {
    return is_good_enough(guess, improve(guess, x))
        ? guess
        : sqrt_iter(improve(guess, x), x);
}

function improve(guess, x) {
    return average(guess, x / guess);
}

function average(x, y) {
    return (x + y) / 2;
}

function is_good_enough(previous_guess, current_guess) {
    return abs((previous_guess - current_guess) / current_guess) < 0.001;
}

function sqrt(x) {
    return sqrt_iter(1, x);
}
```
```js
// test

sqrt(0.1)
> 0.316245562280389

sqrt(0.01)
> 0.10000052895642693

sqrt(0.001)
> 0.031642015868650786

sqrt(0.0001)
> 0.010000714038711746

sqrt(0.00001)
> 0.0031622926477232706

sqrt(0.000001)
> 0.0010005538710539446

sqrt(10000000000)
> 100005.58643074983

sqrt(100000000000)
> 316228.86437127064

sqrt(1000000000000)
> 1000454.9908041331

sqrt(10000000000000)
> 3162433.547242504

sqrt(100000000000000)
> 10000029.650278373
```
## Exercise 1.8
> Newton’s method for cube roots is based on the fact that if y is an approximation to the cube root of x, then a better approximation is given by the value
>
>${\frac{{x/y^2}+2y}3}$
>
>Use this formula to implement a cube-root function analogous to the square-root function. (In section 1.3.4 we will see how to implement Newton’s method in general as an abstraction of these square-root and cube-root functions.)
### Solution
```js
function cube(x) {
    return x * x * x;
}

function abs(x) {
    return x >= 0 ? x : -x;
}

function cube_root_iter(guess, x) {
    return is_good_enough(guess, improve(guess, x))
        ? guess
        : cube_root_iter(improve(guess, x), x);
}

function is_good_enough(previous_guess, current_guess) {
    return abs((previous_guess - current_guess) / current_guess) < 0.001;
}

function improve(guess, x) {
    return (x / (guess * guess) + 2 * guess) / 3;
}

function cube_root(x) {
    return cube_root_iter(1, x);
}

console.log(cube_root(-1));
```
